---
layout: default
modal-id: 8
date: 2014-07-18
img: coetc_drawing.png
img-alt: This would be the image title
img-author: Giulia Forsythe
img-license: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
img-license-link: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
video-link: https://archive.org/embed/COETC
project-date: April 2014
project-name: Colorado Online Energy Training Consortium
institution: Colorado Community Colleges
oer-repository-link: https://www.skillscommons.org/handle/taaccct/41
categories:
  - Energy Technology
  - Information Technology
blurb: Supporting career training for rapidly changing fields.
---
#Overview
[end]

The Colorado Online Energy Training Consortium may be the most important and underreported news story in Colorado. In fact, even though is it well-known in the national conversation on higher education, only one aspect of it has even registered in local media. This is remarkable because by any traditional measure the consortium is worthy of attention. After all, it is enabling the single largest expansion in access to affordable, high-quality education and job training opportunities in Colorado since the state first organized its community colleges into a system almost 70 years ago. 

The consortium, which includes 15 participating Colorado community colleges, has created and published 270 energy and developmental education courses as open educational resources (OER) including lectures, assignments, projects and labs for both face-to-face and hybrid courses. The goal is to rapidly and inexpensively prepare students and unemployed workers for jobs that pay family-sustaining wages in Colorado’s multifaceted economy. The courses were produced with funds provided by the U.S. Department of Labor as part of a national effort to revitalize community college education and job training programs. The goal of the federal program is to create tighter links between community colleges and local labor markets and employers, and to produce open educational resources that students can access at no cost while they are working to earn the educational credentials required to qualify for good jobs.
[end]

#Innovation through OER
[end]

“To be able to provide career skills and training to our local residents and for our regional businesses is a tremendous boon to the future of the industry itself and to the local economy,” said Lee McMains, an Applied Environmental Technology instructor at Aims Community College, in Greely, Colorado, in a statement released by his college. 

Open educational resources (OER) are materials that have an impact on teaching and learning, such as textbooks, multimedia audio, video and presentations that are in the public domain or have been released with an intellectual property license that allows their free use and repurposing by others. Colorado’s Online Energy Training Consortium (COETC) recently received $17.2 million dollars to help its residents plug into the energy economy and also to help redesign developmental education for community college students. The grant is one of three investments of similar size recently awarded to networks of community college campuses in the state through the same federal funding mechanism, each targeting different industries. The funds support change and innovation, including through the use of OER particularly in specialized technical disciplines.   
[end]

#Preparation for changing fields
[end]

COETC may not yet be a household name in Colorado, but its impact is felt from the Rocky Mountains to the great plains. Traditionally, Colorado’s energy sector has been fueled by oil & gas, mining, and utility industries, but recently, it has also been transforming into a 21st Century leader in green energy production. The Federal grant dollars enabled COETC and the Colorado Community College System to strengthen and improve its existing educational programs and create stackable certificates to align with the needs of the energy sector as it continues to change. The federal funds  also supported the colleges throughout the system in freely sharing the new and redesigned courses, ensuring students are being taught skills that can be used state-wide  The course and program redesign effort was guided by  regional industry partnerships that identified specific workforce needs and aligned the needs with certificate and degree programs. The needs identified by industry generated new curriculum and helped target areas of existing curriculum ripe for improvement. Out of date course offerings were eliminated or modernized, new courses were built to address emerging needs and all materials were distributed throughout the consortium as well as made available online as OER. 

“One focus has been on transforming our energy sector education and job training programs,” says one of the project managers, Pete Lindstrom, who notes that Colorado’s energy economy is substantial and diverse, including renewable sources such as wind and solar and more traditional oil and gas fossil fuels, as well as related processing technologies. “One of our goals was to make our programs and certificates applicable to any type of energy,” says Lindstrom. “Our students need a well-rounded education. It’s not enough for us to just concentrate on any one type of energy production in a program. And they also need to be able to earn stackable credentials so they can quickly get some training, get a job, and continue their education.” 
[end]

#Accelerating developmental education
[end]

A second aspect of the consortium’s work that has received national attention involves redesigning the state’s post-secondary developmental education programs. Experience and research indicated that the traditional model of post-secondary developmental education was preventing many students from obtaining a certificate or degree. Before the redesign, community college students in Colorado often spent as many as four semesters in non-credit developmental math courses and three semesters trying to move past developmental English instruction.  These courses were intended to prepare students for college level work.  Instead, in a scenario playing out on many other community college campuses across the country, Colorado’s developmental education courses often taught students exactly the wrong lesson, namely, that college was not for them. “We’ve redesigned the developmental education program so more students move on to college-level course work after just one term,” Lindstrom says. The work drew on findings of an 18-month, faculty led Colorado state task force that had identified key reforms needed to enable accelerated developmental progress, such as integrating contextualized developmental education into substantive for-credit coursework. “It’s turning into a big success for us,” says Lindstrom.
[end]

#Opening careers
[end]

But the biggest success may be the most obvious one.  The early results, based on a scan of COETC courses already online, shows that students in Colorado using these courses are now saving between 20 and 80 percent of the costs of learning materials they would have previously had to purchase, and in some cases, the new courses are entirely OER-based, which fully eliminates that expense. The savings allow students to use more of their limited personal resources or financial aid on necessary items such as rent, transportation, child care, food -- and to pay utility bills to the industry many of them hope to join. 

Strengthening developmental education and job training programs offered by Colorado’s community colleges in the energy sector has proven worthwhile, says Lindstrom, who adds that funding the use, development and continuous improvement of OER is a “transformative” investment that will generate benefits far into the future. “We are able to share the OER out there with the world and we can also use the free material that others are sharing so we can gather more information about what is happening outside Colorado,” he says. “Our workers need to be able to move throughout the country in order to be able to continue to develop their careers and skills. Having our materials be open and being able to access the open learning materials available elsewhere is just invaluable.”  

For more information on COETC, go to the Colorado Online Energy Training Consortium website (https://www.cccs.edu/partnering-for-success/trade-adjustment-assistance/taa-coetc/). To access their OER directory, go to http://cccscoetc.weebly.com. COETC is supported by a grant of $17.2 million from the U.S. Department of Labor. All of the new intellectual property produced with federal funds from this grant will be made available via a public digital repository housed at www.skillscommons.org
[end]
