---
layout: default
modal-id: 1
date: 2014-07-18
img: wyoming_drawing.png
img-alt: This would be the image title
img-author: Giulia Forsythe
img-license: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
img-license-link: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
video-link: https://archive.org/embed/NWCCD
project-date: April 2014
project-name: Pathway to Success
institution: Northern Wyoming Community College District
oer-repository-link: https://www.skillscommons.org/handle/taaccct/893
categories:
  - Energy Technology
blurb: Flexing to meet the needs of todays student workers.
---

#Overview
[end]

For young people growing up in Wyoming’s mining towns the problem isn’t finding a job, but having found one too young. Unlike many other critical national industries, Wyoming’s mineral extraction sector often recruits new workers right out of high school. The young workers are enticed by wages that are usually higher than the national average for fresh recruits with little or no post-secondary education or job experience. But serious problem emerge later, when those same workers have families to support, rigid job schedules, roughly the same wages they started with, and no educational credentials or other skills that qualify them for promotions or higher wages. “We have a lot of people who have family or work obligations and don’t have a long time period they can devote to school,” says Jay Lindsay, project manager for Northern Wyoming Community College District’s recently developed Mining Technology Associate of Applied Science Degree program. The solution: an accelerated delivery model that takes the needs of Wyoming’s modern mine worker into account. “We’ve redesigned the program to move it away from what was really the career model of the 1940’s or 1950’s,” says Lindsay. The early results indicate it was well worth the effort: higher grade point averages than in comparable programs and a 93 percent retention rate.
[end]

#Factors for success
[end]

Several factors account for the success of the new program, according to Lindsay. More flexible course meeting schedules now permit students to do class work online at times that don’t interfere with work. A hybrid approach carefully blends online and in-person instruction to benefit from the strengths of both methodologies. Local mining companies, grateful for the opportunity to help develop curriculum tailored to meet their specific needs, have donated technical equipment and specialized gear that students need for hands-on instruction. And, whenever possible, the program relies on free open educational resources (OER) to reduce program delivery costs and improve quality. Some of the OER is created in partnership with mining companies but most of it repurposed from other sources. By using OER from other sources NWCCD can “draw from other subject matter experts across the country or possibly even across the world,” says Lindsay, “and then we’re able to focus on what we do well to increase the quality of the education experience.”
[end]

#Federal investment in OER
[end]

Some of the OER is created in partnership with mining companies but most of it repurposed from other sources. By using OER from other sources NWCCD can “draw from other subject matter experts across the country or possibly even across the world,” says Lindsay, “and then we’re able to focus on what we do well to increase the quality of the education experience.”

NWCCD’s revamped mining certificate program is just one of several new or improved community college offerings in the state that help job seekers or workers rapidly obtain the training and certificates they need to land a good job or advance in their careers. The programs are the outcome of four  waves of federal investments in Wyoming’s community college and workforce development system from 2010 to 2015 provided by the U.S. Department of Labor. All told, these new federal investments have pumped more than $10 million into the coffers of Wyoming’s community college system to support efforts to develop and improve community college education and job training programs identified as high need by local educators and businesses in Wyoming.

“Federal funds for focused program changes and capacity building helps the college make significant changes without pulling the funding from other ongoing operations,” said Dr. Paul Young, President of NWCCD, when he announced the second grant award of nearly $2.5 million to the NWCCD Board of Trustees in a statement released by the college. “The federal grants are game changers if we take advantage of those that are aligned with our priorities and this one is.”
[end]

#Certificates for advancement
[end]

NWCCD’s revamped mining certificate program is just one of several new or improved community college offerings in the state that help job seekers or workers rapidly obtain the training and certificates they need to land a good job or advance in their careers. The programs are the outcome of four  waves of federal investments in Wyoming’s community college and workforce development system from 2010 to 2015 provided by the U.S. Department of Labor. All told, these new federal investments have pumped more than $10 million into the coffers of Wyoming’s community college system to support efforts to develop and improve community college education and job training programs identified as high need by local educators and businesses in Wyoming.

“Federal funds for focused program changes and capacity building helps the college make significant changes without pulling the funding from other ongoing operations,” said Dr. Paul Young, President of NWCCD, when he announced the second grant award of nearly $2.5 million to the NWCCD Board of Trustees in a statement released by the college. “The federal grants are game changers if we take advantage of those that are aligned with our priorities and this one is.”

Wyoming is expected to need an additional 11,000 skilled mine workers over the next ten years, according to research cited by NWCCD. An additional 1,000 engineers and technicians will also be required to meet anticipated demand. Tens of thousands of other Wyoming jobs rely on the recirculation of income originally generated by the mining sector. Thanks to the new, more flexible education programs, students and workers can now earn a Certificate in Supervision after an 18-credit-hour program, a credential that some local employers accept as a qualification for promotion from entry level status.  The credits are also applicable toward fully accredited Associate’s or Bachelor’s degrees.

In addition to the mining sciences program, other community college job training programs in Wyoming now being modernized with the same recently awarded federal funds include heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), Machine Tool Technology, Welding Technology and Electrician Apprenticeship programs, among others. In each case, the funds support the development and use of free open educational resources, online learning, and enhanced student support services. Nearly $600,000 of the most recent award will be used to pay for training simulators and equipment for the technical and apprenticeship programs.
[end]

#Better access for students
[end]

In accordance with the rules of the federal funding program, all new intellectual property produced for use by any of the federally funded programs will be released with an intellectual property license that permits their free use and improvement by others. The requirement ensures that community college students in Wyoming have the highest quality learning materials at the lowest possible cost. It also discourages schools from asking students to spend money on learning resources when materials of equal or better quality are freely available elsewhere or when participating experts can create them.

The cost of learning materials in mining education programs previously prevented some students from taking a full load each semester, according to college officials.  “One of the best things we can do with an open curriculum is to remove the costs of textbooks,” says Lindsay. 

“The U.S. Department of Labor’s priorities have aligned well with the community college mission,” added Dr. Young, NWCCD President, in his statement.  “This is especially true with our emphasis on career technical education and preparedness for the workforce.”
[end]
